Global projections of ecosystem responses to increasing climatic and anthropogenic pressures are needed to inform adaptation planning. However, data of appropriate spatiotemporal resolution are often not available to parameterise complex environmental processes at the global scale. In particular, adaptation planning is needed for mangroves ecosystems, but there is high uncertainty in the direction of response to climate change because of strong geomorphic feedbacks. We aimed to make projections for the global risk of mangrove loss and the prospects for conservation actions to avert loss. We extended a network simulation method to create projections that are robust to data gaps, but can be validated against available global data. We then project the direction of net change in mangrove ecosystems, as well as the uncertainty in outcomes, worldwide under the SSP5-8.5 climate emissions scenario by the years 2040-2060. We projected that seaward net loss is the most probable outcome in 77% [37-78%; 95% confidence interval (CI)] of mangrove forest units, while 30% [15-59%; CI] were projected to experience landward net gain or stability. In >50% of forest units, the the probability of net loss or gain was nearly equal. Conservation actions were projected to nearly double the number of mangrove forest units likely to experience net gain or stability in the future. Our approach to simulating uncertainty in dynamic feedbacks provides a clear indication of how certain (or uncertain) ecosystem persistence is and thus can inform conservation planning. The approach also identifies places with high uncertainty that we suggest are priorities for gathering local data to use in full quantitative models of mangrove ecosystem dynamics. 