---
date: '2/26/2017'
categories: rstats
title: "Make your R simulation models  20 times faster"
published: true
---

Make your R simulation models 20 times faster
-------------------------------------------

R can be frustratingly slow if you use its loops. However, you can speed
it up significantly (e.g. 20 times!) using the `Rcpp` package. That
could turn a day long simulation into an hour long simulation.

I had heard years ago about the `Rcpp` package. `Rcpp` lets you write
and use C ++ functions in R. However, I had never bothered to learn how
to write C ++. Instead if my simulation model got too slow, I just
redefined the problem (e.g. by using smaller spatial domain) so I could
continue with R.

<div class = "image_caption">
<img src ="speeding-up-sims/popn-tseries-1.png" alt="" class="image_float"/>
<p> Output of one of the population model runs showing solutions from an R function and an Rcpp function. The C++ version gives an identical results and was up to 20 times faster. </p>
</div>

I persisted with R, rather than use another language, because of its
powerful graphics and the convenience of using a functional language
like R to perform sensitivity analyses. More on this later.

The other day I was browsing Wickhams [Advanced
R](http://adv-r.had.co.nz/) book and realised it is actually pretty easy
to write basic C++ loops.

Then I wondered if it would still be faster if you had to make repeated
calls to the same C++ function, for instance if you wanted to run a
sensitivity analysis, varying some model parameters. I like to use R for
this task because the `purrr` package makes it incredibly easy to run
arbitrary combinations of parameters through a function. Then it is
straightforward to summarize and plot the results with `ggplot2`.

Turns out you can get a massive improvement, even for repeated calls to
the same function. Here is a test.

### A population model in R

First up, let's write a simple model for simulating population size over
time, according to the logistic function. The below function just takes
your standard `r` (intrinsic population growth) and `k` (carrying
capacity) parameters and simulates population size starting at `yinit`
over `t` years.

Further, to I have included a stochastic process, whose variation is
controlled by `thetasd`, to illustrate `Rcpp` random number generator.

    logmodr <- function(t, yinit, r, k, thetasd){
        y <- numeric(t)
        y[1] <- yinit
        theta <- rnorm(t, 0, thetasd)
        for(i in 2:t){
            y[i] <- y[i-1]*(r - r*(y[i-1]/k)) * exp(theta[i])
        }
        return(y)
    }

Note that I also ran these models without the stochastic component. The
speedup was even greater when you compared C++ to R without the
stochastic step (about 20 times).

### A population model in C++

Now let's write the equivalent C++ function. You will need to install
the `Rcpp` package. Note that it has some other software dependencies,
so I recommend you read the guide on
[CRAN](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/Rcpp/index.html).

We write the function definition as a string and pass it to
`cppFunction` from `Rcpp`:

    library(Rcpp)
        cppFunction("NumericVector logmodc(int t, double yinit, double r,
    double k, double thetasd){
                NumericVector y(t);
                y[0] = yinit;
          NumericVector theta = rnorm(t, 0, thetasd);
                for (int i = 1; i < t; ++i){
                    y[i] = y[i-1]*(r - r*(y[i-1] / k)) * exp(theta[i]);
                    }
                return y;
        }
        ")

Hopefully you can understand this, even if you are not familiar with
C++. The syntax is reasonably similar to R. If you learned to program in
R you may notice a few discrepencies.

First, C++ requires that you specify the type of each variable when its
created. You can't just create new variables without assigning them a
type, and you can't just change the type. This makes C++ more efficient
than R, because the computer knows exactly how much memory to allocate a
variable and doesn't have to watch for changes.

Second, notice I start the iterator at time-step `1`, whereas in the R
code we started at time-step `2`. In C++ vectors are indexed starting at
`0`.

Finally, don't forget to end lines with `;` (you can use `;` to end
lines in R, but it is not essential).

### Running a single simulation

First up, we need to define the model parameters:

    t <- 100
    yinit <- 1
    k <- 20
    thetasd <- 0.1
    r <- 0.2

Now we can run our model. I am just going to plug the models straight
into `microbenchmark`, so I can compare their times.

    library(microbenchmark)
    mb1 <- microbenchmark(
        logmodc(t, yinit, 1.4, k, thetasd),
        logmodr(t, yinit, 1.4, k, thetasd)
    )
    mb1

    ## Unit: microseconds
    ##                                expr     min       lq      mean   median
    ##  logmodc(t, yinit, 1.4, k, thetasd)  10.051  11.1100  12.70373  11.7415
    ##  logmodr(t, yinit, 1.4, k, thetasd) 179.053 198.8315 251.48889 224.3450
    ##        uq      max neval cld
    ##   12.8825   67.801   100  a
    ##  296.1400 1098.436   100   b

So the C++ version is 19 times faster.

### Running multiple simulations

So C++ is faster for a single call to a function (that contains a loop).
No surprises there. What if we want to make repeated calls to the same
function, is C++ still faster than R? We might want to make repeated
calls if we want to run different values of `r` through our model to do
a sensitivty analysis.

We could increase the scope of the C++ code to include a loop over
different values of `r`. However, then we would lose some of the
convenience of R, which is good at manipulating data. We also wouldn't
be able to use `purrr` package to make sensitivity analysis easy.

First, up let's create a sequence of `r` values:

    rseq <- seq(1.1, 2.2, length.out = 10)

Now we can run our two models. I will use `purrr::map` (the `::` just
means `map` is in the package `purrr` and avoids another call to
`library()`). We will also use `set.seed()` to make sure both algorithms
generate the same series of random numbers, that way we can check
whether the results are identical.

    set.seed(42)
    yc <- purrr::map(rseq, ~logmodc(t, yinit, .x, k, thetasd))
    set.seed(42)
    yr <- purrr::map(rseq, ~logmodr(t, yinit, .x, k, thetasd))

`map` iteratively steps through `rseq` replacing the `.x` in the
function call with each value of `r` in turn. Note that we also have to
turn the function call into a formula (with `~`) to iterate in this way.

`map` returns a list, where each element is a time-series of population
sizes for a given value of `r`.

Let's plot the result, for the second value of `r`:

    plot(yr[[2]], type = "l", col = "DarkBlue", lwd = 2)
    points(yc[[2]], pch = 16, col = "Tomato", cex = 0.8)
    legend('topleft', legend = c("R solution","C solution"),
           pch = 16, col = c("DarkBlue", "Tomato"))

<img src ="speeding-up-sims/popn-tseries-1.png" alt="" class="image_normal"/>

They look identical, excellent.

Now, let's compare the time. Remember I had wondered whether repeated
calls to a C++ function might lose some of the performance gain:

    mb2 <- microbenchmark(
        purrr::map(rseq, ~logmodc(t, yinit, .x, k, thetasd)),
        purrr::map(rseq, ~logmodr(t, yinit, .x, k, thetasd))
    )
    mb2

    ## Unit: microseconds
    ##                                                  expr      min        lq
    ##  purrr::map(rseq, ~logmodc(t, yinit, .x, k, thetasd))  151.421  166.4165
    ##  purrr::map(rseq, ~logmodr(t, yinit, .x, k, thetasd)) 1890.549 2047.6310
    ##       mean    median       uq      max neval cld
    ##   199.9101  179.5795  221.885  371.192   100  a
    ##  2543.3459 2233.7455 2534.350 9173.440   100   b

Turns out we still gain a 12 times improvement when using C++.

I don't believe I have been wasting so many hours waiting for
simulations to run all these years. Learning a bit of C++ is well worth
the investment.
