---
date: '12/29/2020'
title: Fast functions with pipes
categories: rstats
published: TRUE
---
Fast functions with pipes
=========================

Pipes are becoming popular R syntax, because they help make code more
readable and can speed up coding. You can even use pipes to create
functions. This is handy if you want to repeat a piped process for
several different datasets.

Trivial example
---------------

Let’s start with a trivial example. You can access pipes through the
`tidyverse` or the original `magrittr` package.

We’ll create a function that plots a data series in rank order:

    library(magrittr)
    rank_plot <- . %>%
      sort() %>%
      plot()

So to create a function out of a pipe we just start the pipe with the
`.`.

Now `rank_plot` has no data, but is rather what is called a ‘functional
sequence’. Type `rank_plot` in your console to see this.

Let’s use it to plot two randomly generated variables:

    set.seed(2020)

    x <- rnorm(30)
    y <- runif(30)

    par(mfrow = c(2,2))
    plot(x) #x data in original order
    plot(y) # y data in original order
    rank_plot(x) #rank ordered data
    rank_plot(y)

![](blogs-2020/2020-12-29-pipe-functions_files/figure-markdown_strict/unnamed-chunk-2-1.png)

Maps
----

Let’s true a slightly more sophisticated example, a map.

We’ll use `tmap` to make the maps.

First access some data. Here I’ve picked a couple of random mushroom
species that have data on the Queensland Government’s Wetland Info page.
The data-tables record (rather out-of-date) observations of the species
and the sites where they were recorded. This data is just for the area
around Brisbane where I live:

    amanita <- read.csv(url("http://apps.des.qld.gov.au/species/?op=getsurveysbyspecies&taxonid=25531&f=csv"))
    psilocybe <- read.csv(url("http://apps.des.qld.gov.au/species/?op=getsurveysbyspecies&taxonid=28689&f=csv"))
    names(psilocybe)

    ##  [1] "ID"                  "Longitude"           "Latitude"           
    ##  [4] "TaxonID"             "ScientificName"      "SiteVisitID"        
    ##  [7] "StartDate"           "EndDate"             "SiteID"             
    ## [10] "SiteCode"            "LocalityDetails"     "LocationPrecision"  
    ## [13] "ProjectID"           "ProjectName"         "OrganisationID"     
    ## [16] "OrganisationName"    "OrganisationAcronym"

I’ve wrapped the web addresses in the `url()` function as they are web
datasources.

Now to the maps. First, let’s make a function out of a tmap call:

    library(tmap)
    library(sf)

    ## Linking to GEOS 3.8.1, GDAL 3.1.1, PROJ 6.3.1

    mymap <- . %>%
      st_as_sf(coords = c("Longitude", "Latitude")) %>%
      {tm_shape(.) +
      tm_markers()}

If you want the map to be interactive, do this next:

    tmap_mode("view")
    tmap_options(basemaps = c(Canvas = "Esri.WorldTopoMap"))

The function first converts the csv to a spatial points (st\_points)
object, then maps that data. Note I had to wrap the map in `{}` to
include it at the end of the pipe.

Now we can use it to map any of our dataframes. For instance:

    mymap(psilocybe)

![](blogs-2020/2020-12-29-pipe-functions_files/figure-markdown_strict/screen-shot-map.png)


(This is a screen shot, but if you do this yourself it will be interactive)


Conclusion
----------

So pipes are also handy for creating quick functions. This could also be
very useful in situations where we pipe a series of `dplyr` functions to
wrangle a dataset. They could be combined with loops, `apply` or
`pmap::map` to repeat the call for different dataset.

One thing that I find challenging with `%>%` is debugging is very hard. So a word
of warning, keep your pipes short and simple so they are easy to debug
(or use one of the specialist pipe debugging packages).

Pipes will likely be included in base R soon, and the R Core team are
promising to make them more debuggable.

Enjoy.
