---
date: '3/27/2021'
title: How to solve common problems with GAMs
categories: rstats
published: TRUE
---

How to solve common problems with GAMs
======================================

Here I’ll provide solutions to some common problems I run into when
fitting GAMs with `mgcv` and ways to solve them. The four problems are:

-   Categorical variables should be input to gam() as factors

-   Adjust the degrees of freedom parameter to avoid an error involving
    the maximum degrees of freedom

-   Use the REML method for smaller datasets to avoid overfitting

-   How to deal with crazy extrapolations of a response when there are
    large gaps in measurements of a covariate

Categorical variables should be factors
---------------------------------------

Categorical variables can cause errors if they are not specified in
dataframes as character vectors, and not as factors. But `mgcv` is
inconsistent about whether you need to use factors or not. It is always
safest to declare categorical variables as factors if using `mgcv`.

Oddly character vectors are fine if the categorical variable is included
as an additive term like:

    fit1 <- gam(y ~ s(x) + group)

But if you want the spline to vary by groups like this:

    fit1 <- gam(y ~ group + s(x, by = group))

You will get this obscure error message:

    Error in smoothCon(split$smooth.spec[[i]], data, knots, absorb.cons,
        scale.penalty = scale.penalty, : Can't find by variable

The solution is as simple as changing the class of your categorical
variable before using the GAM: `dat$group <- factor(dat$group)`.

The new version of R (&gt;4.0) defaults to reading in external
dataframes with `stringsAsFactors == FALSE` meaning it reads categorical
variables in as characters, not factors. Factors can be more annoying
than characters for many other reasons, so watch out for this error with
your GAM code.

Insufficient degrees of freedom
-------------------------------

The default settings for GAM smooths is to try and estimate the degrees
of freedom (which controls the ‘wiggliness’) from the data. But this
routine can fail if you many more replicates than levels in the smooth.
Consider this data:

![](2021-03-27-common-GAM-problems/unnamed-chunk-1-1.png)

We have ten replicates for each of 5 levels of x. Data like this is
common in experimental settings.

If I try fit a GAM with default settings I get an error:

    fit1 <- gam(y ~ s(x), data = dat)

    ## Error in smooth.construct.tp.smooth.spec(object, dk$data, dk$knots):
    A term has fewer unique covariate combinations than specified maximum
    degrees of freedom

Meaning the GAM has failed to construct a sensible smooth term for this
data. You can limit the maximum df of the smooth using the `k`
parameter:

    fit1 <- gam(y ~ s(x, k = 3), data = dat)

Now my GAM fits fine and looks like this:

![](2021-03-27-common-GAM-problems/unnamed-chunk-4-1.png)

If you want to force the GAM to fit a smooth a specific degrees of
freedom, then use `fx = TRUE`:

    fit1 <- gam(y ~ s(x, k = 4, fx = TRUE), data = dat)

The above code forces the GAM to fit with exactly k-1 = 2 an effective
DF (EDF in the gam summary).

Overfitting
-----------

The default method for fitting in GAM tends to overfit smaller datasets.
Overfitting tends to look like spline fits that are too wiggly.

How you define ‘small’ depends on variation and effect sizes in your
data WRT the model, but generally sample sizes smaller than 100s to
1000s of samples ‘small’ in this context.

This overfitting is well known and is [described in Simon Wood’s classic
book on GAMs and
mgcv](https://www.routledge.com/Generalized-Additive-Models-An-Introduction-with-R-Second-Edition/Wood/p/book/9781498728331).

Here’s an example. Say you were expecting a smooth, but non-linear, fit
to your data. You use a GAM, but you get a result like this:

![](2021-03-27-common-GAM-problems/unnamed-chunk-6-1.png)

Those bumps in the curve cannot be justified by any a-priori knowledge
you have about the system you are studying. So you’d like a smoother
fit.

The default method uses generalized cross validation to fit the smooth.
The restricted maximum likelihood method is more robust for small sample
sizes. So generally in ecological datasets you’ll want to specify the
“REML” method like this:

    fit1 <- gam(y~ s(x), method = "REML", data = dat)

Now our smooth looks like a more reasonable linear slope:

![](2021-03-27-common-GAM-problems/unnamed-chunk-8-1.png)

Now your trend reduces to a straight linear trend.

Extreme interoplated values
---------------------------

Gaps in an x-covariate, such as gaps in a time-series, can be a problem
to deal with if you are trying to interpolate to those gaps.

Quoting from [my last blog about interpolation with
GAMs](https://www.seascapemodels.org/rstats/2021/03/27/GAMs-interpolation.html):

There is no straightforward answer to solving this problem. The answer
depends on what you know about the system from prior work. Ideally you’d
collect more data for the intermediate x values, but if that is not
possible here are some options:

1.  Keep the result above if you have reason to believe there truly is a
    hump shaped relationship between x and y. If you that x causes y and
    have a theory for that relationship then the extrapolation of y
    values might be reasonable. This theory would be based on prior work
    on the two variables.

2.  Keep the fit above but refrain from making predictions in the gap.

3.  Try a different basis spline for the smooth. See `?smooth.terms` for
    options

4.  Modify the smoother to have a first order, not second order,
    penalty. See my [last blog for an
    explanation](https://www.seascapemodels.org/rstats/2021/03/27/GAMs-interpolation.html).
    You’ll get a fit like this:  

![](/2021-03-27-GAMs-interpolation/unnamed-chunk-2-1.png)


Detailed example of fitting GAM with categorical variable
---------------------------------------------------------

Here is a detailed explanation.

First generate some data. We’ll simulate some data `y` that is related
to `x` via a polynomial (hump shaped) function. Then there will be three
groups in variable `grp`. Each group has a different mean, which will
just offset the three groups on the y-axis from each other. See plot
below:

    library(ggplot2)
    library(mgcv)

    n <- 99
    dat <- data.frame(x = runif(n),
                      grp = rep(letters[1:3], each = n/3),
                      cat_effect = rep(c(0, 1, -1), each = n/3))

    dat$y <- with(dat, 7*x -8*x^2 + cat_effect + rnorm(n, sd = 0.1))

    ggplot(dat) +
      aes(x = x, y = y, color = grp)  +
      geom_point() +
      theme_classic()

![](2021-03-27-common-GAM-problems/unnamed-chunk-9-1.png) First
we’ll fit a model that fits a spline to x and estimates a constant
additive term for each group. This should provide a good fit to the
original data, because it is very close to the model we used to generate
the data. The splines should be able to approximate the polynomial and
the categorical will allow for each group’s curve to be offset.

    fit1 <- gam(y ~s(x) + grp, data = dat)

This fits fine, I like to use `visreg` to view GAM results. This plot
will show x on the x-axis, fits on the y-axis and have one panel for
each group.

    library(visreg)
    visreg(fit1, xvar = "x",
           by = "grp", data = dat,
           method = "REML")

![](2021-03-27-common-GAM-problems/unnamed-chunk-11-1.png)

Now say we want to compare this to a model where we allow splines to
vary for each group. This model looks like this:

    fit2 <- gam(y ~s(x, by = grp) + grp, data = dat)

    ## Error in smoothCon(split$smooth.spec[[i]], data, knots, absorb.cons,
        scale.penalty = scale.penalty, : Can't find by variable

Which gives us an error. So simply convert the group to a factor (here I
declare a new variable) and use that:

    dat$grp2 <- factor(dat$grp)
    fit2 <- gam(y ~s(x, by = grp2) + grp2, data = dat)
    visreg(fit2, xvar = "x",
           by = "grp", data = dat,
           method = "REML")

![](2021-03-27-common-GAM-problems/unnamed-chunk-13-1.png)

Now it works fine.
